docs/ARCHITECTURE.md, before:

# Intent Kernel Architecture

## Overview

Intent Kernel is a bare-metal stenographic operating system where **steno strokes are the native semantic unit**.

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                        USER INPUT (Multiple Modes)                       │
│                                                                          │
│  Steno Machine (USB HID) ────▶ Direct Strokes                          │
│  Standard Keyboard       ────▶ Natural English ✨ NEW!                  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                      ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    ENGLISH I/O LAYER (Optional Translation)              │
│                                                                          │
│  Input:  English Text → Parser → ConceptID                             │
│          • 200+ phrase variations                                       │
│          • 50+ synonym expansions                                       │
│          • Multi-stage parsing pipeline                                 │
│                                                                          │
│  Output: Intent Result → Template Engine → Natural Language             │
│          • Context-aware responses                                      │
│          • User mode adaptation (Beginner/Advanced)                     │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                      ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                      STENO-NATIVE KERNEL CORE                           │
│                                                                          │
│  Stroke (23-bit) → Dictionary → Intent → Executor                       │
│  Pure semantic processing. No character handling.                       │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Kernel Philosophy**: Steno-native core with optional English translation layer.

- **Steno Mode**: Direct stroke → intent (0.1μs, maximum performance)
- **English Mode**: Natural language → intent (~30μs, universal accessibility)
- **Hybrid Mode**: Mix both freely (power users)

---

## Stenographic Input

### Stroke Representation

A stroke is a 23-bit pattern representing simultaneous key presses on a steno machine:

```rust
pub struct Stroke {
    pub bits: u32,  // 23 bits used
}
```

### Plover Key Layout

The kernel uses the standard Plover layout:

```
Position:  0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22
Key:       #  S-  T-  K-  P-  W-  H-  R-  A-  O-  *  -E  -U  -F  -R  -P  -B  -L  -G  -T  -S  -D  -Z
```

### RTFCRE Notation

Strokes are written in RTFCRE (Real-Time Format for Court Reporting Equipment) notation:

| Pattern | RTFCRE | Meaning |
|---------|--------|---------|
| Keys before vowels | Left side | Initial consonants |
| A, O | Vowels | Vowel sounds |
| * | Asterisk | Modifier/toggle |
| E, U | Vowels | Vowel sounds |
| Keys after vowels | Right side | Final consonants |

Examples:
- `KAT` → K- + A- + -T (the word "cat")
- `HELP` → H- + -E + -L + -P
- `STPH` → S- + T- + P- + H- (the brief "in")

---

## Dictionary System

### Structure

```rust
pub struct StenoDictionary {
    entries: BTreeMap<StrokeSequence, DictEntry>,
}

pub struct DictEntry {
    pub strokes: StrokeSequence,
    pub concept: ConceptID,
    pub name: &'static str,
}
```

### Stroke Sequences

Single strokes map to concepts:
```
HELP → concepts::HELP
STAT → concepts::STATUS
```

Multi-stroke sequences (2+ strokes):
```
RAOE/PWOOT → concepts::REBOOT      (2 strokes)
SHUT/TKOUPB → concepts::SHUTDOWN   (2 strokes)
TKEUS/PHRAEU → concepts::DISPLAY   (2 strokes)
TPHU/TPAOEU/-L → concepts::NEW_FILE (3 strokes)
KP-U/EUPB/TPO → concepts::CPU_INFO  (3 strokes)
```

### Multi-Stroke Processing

The engine buffers strokes when a prefix match exists:

```rust
pub struct MultiStrokeDictionary {
    entries: [Option<MultiStrokeEntry>; MAX_MULTI_ENTRIES],
    count: usize,
}

impl MultiStrokeDictionary {
    /// Check if sequence matches or could match
    /// Returns: (has_exact_match, has_prefix_match)
    pub fn check_prefix(&self, sequence: &StrokeSequence) -> (bool, bool);
}
```

**Timeout**: 500ms between strokes. If no match after timeout, buffer is flushed.

**Buffer Size**: Up to 8 strokes can be buffered for long sequences.

### ConceptID

A 64-bit semantic identifier:

```rust
pub struct ConceptID(pub u64);

// Namespace layout:
// 0x0001_xxxx - System concepts
// 0x0002_xxxx - Display concepts
// 0x0003_xxxx - Memory concepts
// 0x0004_xxxx - Device concepts
// 0x0008_xxxx - User concepts
```

---

## Intent Execution

### The Broadcast Model (1:N)

The Intent Kernel uses a **Broadcast Architecture** inspired by biological motor control. An intent is not a command sent to a single function; it is a semantic signal broadcast to the entire system.

```rust
pub struct Intent {
    pub concept_id: ConceptID,
    pub data: IntentData,
    pub confidence: u8,
}
```

**Listeners:**
- **Executor**: Performs the primary action (e.g., "Open File").
- **UI Layer**: Updates the display (e.g., "Show 'Opening File'").
- **Logger**: Records the intent for history.
- **Predictive Engine**: Anticipates the next likely intent.

### Executor

The `IntentExecutor` manages this broadcast:

```rust
pub struct IntentExecutor {
    handlers: HandlerRegistry,  // Supports multiple handlers per concept
    queue: IntentQueue,
}

impl IntentExecutor {
    pub fn execute(&self, intent: &Intent) {
        // Broadcast to ALL registered handlers for this concept
        // Handlers can choose to "Consume" (StopPropagation) or "Observe" (Continue)
        self.handlers.dispatch(intent);
    }
}
```

---

## Perception Layer

The Perception Layer bridges the gap between raw sensor data and semantic intent using **Sensor Fusion**.

### Sensor Fusion (N:1)

Instead of relying on a single sensor, the kernel aggregates data from all active sensors into a unified "World Model".

```rust
pub struct PerceptionManager {
    sensors: Vec<Box<dyn ObjectDetector>>,
}

impl PerceptionManager {
    pub fn detect_objects(&self) -> Vec<DetectedObject> {
        // Fuse data from Camera, Lidar, Radar, etc.
        let mut world_model = Vec::new();
        for sensor in &self.sensors {
            let data = sensor.detect();
            world_model.merge(data);
        }
        world_model
    }
}
```

### Supported Sensors
- **Hailo-8 NPU**: High-speed object detection (26 TOPS).
- **CPU Fallback**: `ColorBlobDetector` for basic visual tasks.
- **Virtual Sensors**: For testing and simulation.

### Heads-Up Display (HUD)
A visual interface that renders directly to the framebuffer (no window manager).
- **Steno Tape**: Visualizes the raw stroke stream (RTFCRE).
- **Intent Stream**: Visualizes recognized intents.
- **Status Bar**: Shows system health and statistics.

```rust
pub struct Hud {
    tape_log: TextLog<20>,
    intent_log: TextLog<20>,
}
```

---

## 
## Hardware Drivers

### UART

Debug output via PL011 UART:

```rust
pub fn uart_write(s: &str);
pub fn uart_read() -> Option<u8>;
```

### Timer

ARM generic timer for scheduling:

```rust
pub fn timer_init();
pub fn timer_tick() -> u64;
pub async fn timer_sleep(ms: u64);
```

### GPIO

Pin control for LEDs and sensors:

```rust
pub fn gpio_set(pin: u32, value: bool);
pub fn gpio_get(pin: u32) -> bool;
```

### USB HID ✅
 
 Steno machine input via USB Host Controller (xHCI 1.2):
 
 ```rust
 pub struct XhciController {
     base_addr: usize,
     dcbaa: Option<NonNull<u8>>,      // Device Context Base Address Array
     cmd_ring: Option<NonNull<u8>>,   // Command Ring
     event_ring: Option<NonNull<u8>>, // Event Ring (Interrupter 0)
 }
 
 pub struct UsbHid {
     // HID Boot Protocol Parser
     pub fn parse_report(&self, report: &KeyboardReport) -> Option<Stroke>;
 }
 ```
 
 **Features**:
 - **Real xHCI Initialization**: Reset, Ring allocation, Interrupt setup.
 - **DMA Memory**: Uses `alloc_dma` for physically contiguous buffers.
 - **Boot Protocol**: Parses standard 8-byte Keyboard Reports.
 - **Key Mapping**: Maps QWERTY keys to Steno layout (Plover standard).

Supported devices:
- Georgi (GBoards)
- Uni (Plover HID Protocol)
- Any HID-compliant steno machine

### Framebuffer Console ✅

Text output on HDMI display:

```rust
pub struct Console {
    framebuffer: &'static mut Framebuffer,
    cursor_x: u32,
    cursor_y: u32,
}

impl Console {
    pub fn print(&mut self, s: &str);
    pub fn clear(&mut self);
}
```

Macros: `cprint!()`, `cprintln!()`

---

## English I/O Layer ✨ NEW!

The English I/O Layer provides natural language accessibility while maintaining the steno-native kernel core.

### Architecture

```rust
pub mod english {
    pub mod phrases;      // 200+ phrase → ConceptID mappings
    pub mod synonyms;     // 50+ synonym expansions
    pub mod parser;       // Multi-stage parsing pipeline
    pub mod responses;    // Natural language generation
    pub mod context;      // Conversation state management
}
```

### Input Pipeline

**Multi-Stage Parsing**:

1. **Normalization**: Lowercase, trim whitespace
2. **Exact Phrase Match**: Check 200+ phrase database
3. **Synonym Expansion**: Expand contractions and synonyms
4. **Keyword Extraction**: Natural language understanding
5. **Steno Fallback**: Try as raw steno notation

**Example**:

```rust
// Stage 2: Exact match
"help" → HELP intent (confidence: 1.0)

// Stage 3: Synonym expansion
"show sys info" → "show system information" → STATUS intent (0.95)

// Stage 4: Keyword extraction
"can you help me?" → extract["help"] → HELP intent (0.9)

// Stage 5: Steno fallback
"STAT" → parse as steno → STATUS intent (1.0)
```

### Output Generation

**Template-Based Responses**:

```rust
pub struct ResponseGenerator {
    pub verbose: bool,  // Adapts to user mode
}

impl ResponseGenerator {
    pub fn generate(&self, intent: &Intent, result: &IntentResult) -> String;
}
```

**Example Responses**:

```
Concise (Advanced): "CPU 45% | RAM 2.3GB | Up 3h"
Verbose (Beginner): "System Status: CPU 45%, Memory 2.3GB/8GB, Uptime 3h 42m"
```

### Conversation Context

**Stateful Understanding**:

```rust
pub struct ConversationContext {
    last_intent: Option<ConceptID>,
    last_result: Option<IntentResult>,
    mode: UserMode,  // Beginner/Intermediate/Advanced
    history: Vec<HistoryEntry>,
}
```

**Features**:
- Follow-up questions: "show it again", "more details"
- Pronoun resolution: "hide it", "show that"
- Auto-upgrade user mode based on usage
- Conversation history (last 10 commands)

### Performance

**Overhead Analysis**:
- Phrase lookup: ~5-10μs (linear search of 200 entries)
- Synonym expansion: ~5μs
- Template generation: ~10-20μs
- **Total**: ~30μs per command

**At 200 WPM** (3.3 commands/sec): 0.0001% CPU

**Steno Bypass**: Power users can bypass English layer entirely (0.1μs direct)

### Integration Example

```rust
use intent_kernel::english;

// Parse natural English
let intent = english::parse("show me system status");

// Execute (kernel core - unchanged)
let result = intent::execute_with_result(&intent.unwrap());

// Generate natural response
let response = english::generate_response(&intent.unwrap(), &result);
println!("{}", response);
// Output: "System: CPU 45%, RAM 2.3GB, Uptime 3h 42m..."
```

### See Also

For complete documentation, see [ENGLISH_LAYER.md](ENGLISH_LAYER.md).

---

## Boot Sequence

1. **Reset**: ARM starts at `_start` in `boot.s`
2. **EL2→EL1**: Drop from hypervisor to kernel mode
3. **BSS Clear**: Zero uninitialized memory
4. **Stack Setup**: Initialize kernel stack
5. **Rust Entry**: Jump to `kernel_main()`
6. **Init Drivers**: UART, Timer, GPIO
7. **Init Steno**: Load dictionary, start engine
8. **Main Loop**: Process strokes forever

---

## Non-Goals

These are explicitly NOT part of the architecture:

- ❌ Deep NLP or LLM-based parsing (English layer uses phrase matching + keyword extraction)
- ❌ Embedding vectors or similarity search (direct lookup only)
- ❌ Traditional shell/terminal
- ❌ POSIX compatibility
- ❌ Backward compatibility with word-based systems

**Note**: English text input is supported as a convenience layer, but internally
all commands are converted to steno strokes. The kernel never parses English—it
only looks up the stroke corresponding to an English word via reverse dictionary.

Commit message:

feat: Implement Real AI (Vector Memory, Sobel Vision) and USB Enumeration

docs/ARCHITECTURE.md, after:

# Intent Kernel Architecture

## Overview

Intent Kernel is a bare-metal stenographic operating system where **steno strokes are the native semantic unit**.

```
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                        USER INPUT (Multiple Modes)                       │
│                                                                          │
│  Steno Machine (USB HID) ────▶ Direct Strokes                          │
│  Standard Keyboard       ────▶ Natural English ✨ NEW!                  │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                      ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                    ENGLISH I/O LAYER (Optional Translation)              │
│                                                                          │
│  Input:  English Text → Parser → ConceptID                             │
│          • 200+ phrase variations                                       │
│          • 50+ synonym expansions                                       │
│          • Multi-stage parsing pipeline                                 │
│                                                                          │
│  Output: Intent Result → Template Engine → Natural Language             │
│          • Context-aware responses                                      │
│          • User mode adaptation (Beginner/Advanced)                     │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                                      ↓
┌─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                      STENO-NATIVE KERNEL CORE                           │
│                                                                          │
│  Stroke (23-bit) → Dictionary → Intent → Executor                       │
│  Pure semantic processing. No character handling.                       │
└─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

**Kernel Philosophy**: Steno-native core with optional English translation layer.

- **Steno Mode**: Direct stroke → intent (0.1μs, maximum performance)
- **English Mode**: Natural language → intent (~30μs, universal accessibility)
- **Hybrid Mode**: Mix both freely (power users)

---

## Stenographic Input

### Stroke Representation

A stroke is a 23-bit pattern representing simultaneous key presses on a steno machine:

```rust
pub struct Stroke {
    pub bits: u32,  // 23 bits used
}
```

### Plover Key Layout

The kernel uses the standard Plover layout:

```
Position:  0   1   2   3   4   5   6   7   8   9  10  11  12  13  14  15  16  17  18  19  20  21  22
Key:       #  S-  T-  K-  P-  W-  H-  R-  A-  O-  *  -E  -U  -F  -R  -P  -B  -L  -G  -T  -S  -D  -Z
```

### RTFCRE Notation

Strokes are written in RTFCRE (Real-Time Format for Court Reporting Equipment) notation:

| Pattern | RTFCRE | Meaning |
|---------|--------|---------|
| Keys before vowels | Left side | Initial consonants |
| A, O | Vowels | Vowel sounds |
| * | Asterisk | Modifier/toggle |
| E, U | Vowels | Vowel sounds |
| Keys after vowels | Right side | Final consonants |

Examples:
- `KAT` → K- + A- + -T (the word "cat")
- `HELP` → H- + -E + -L + -P
- `STPH` → S- + T- + P- + H- (the brief "in")

---

## Dictionary System

### Structure

```rust
pub struct StenoDictionary {
    entries: BTreeMap<StrokeSequence, DictEntry>,
}

pub struct DictEntry {
    pub strokes: StrokeSequence,
    pub concept: ConceptID,
    pub name: &'static str,
}
```

### Stroke Sequences

Single strokes map to concepts:
```
HELP → concepts::HELP
STAT → concepts::STATUS
```

Multi-stroke sequences (2+ strokes):
```
RAOE/PWOOT → concepts::REBOOT      (2 strokes)
SHUT/TKOUPB → concepts::SHUTDOWN   (2 strokes)
TKEUS/PHRAEU → concepts::DISPLAY   (2 strokes)
TPHU/TPAOEU/-L → concepts::NEW_FILE (3 strokes)
KP-U/EUPB/TPO → concepts::CPU_INFO  (3 strokes)
```

### Multi-Stroke Processing

The engine buffers strokes when a prefix match exists:

```rust
pub struct MultiStrokeDictionary {
    entries: [Option<MultiStrokeEntry>; MAX_MULTI_ENTRIES],
    count: usize,
}

impl MultiStrokeDictionary {
    /// Check if sequence matches or could match
    /// Returns: (has_exact_match, has_prefix_match)
    pub fn check_prefix(&self, sequence: &StrokeSequence) -> (bool, bool);
}
```

**Timeout**: 500ms between strokes. If no match after timeout, buffer is flushed.

**Buffer Size**: Up to 8 strokes can be buffered for long sequences.

### ConceptID

A 64-bit semantic identifier:

```rust
pub struct ConceptID(pub u64);

// Namespace layout:
// 0x0001_xxxx - System concepts
// 0x0002_xxxx - Display concepts
// 0x0003_xxxx - Memory concepts
// 0x0004_xxxx - Device concepts
// 0x0008_xxxx - User concepts
```

---

## Intent Execution

### The Broadcast Model (1:N)

The Intent Kernel uses a **Broadcast Architecture** inspired by biological motor control. An intent is not a command sent to a single function; it is a semantic signal broadcast to the entire system.

```rust
pub struct Intent {
    pub concept_id: ConceptID,
    pub data: IntentData,
    pub confidence: u8,
}
```

**Listeners:**
- **Executor**: Performs the primary action (e.g., "Open File").
- **UI Layer**: Updates the display (e.g., "Show 'Opening File'").
- **Logger**: Records the intent for history.
- **Predictive Engine**: Anticipates the next likely intent.

### Executor

The `IntentExecutor` manages this broadcast:

```rust
pub struct IntentExecutor {
    handlers: HandlerRegistry,  // Supports multiple handlers per concept
    queue: IntentQueue,
}

impl IntentExecutor {
    pub fn execute(&self, intent: &Intent) {
        // Broadcast to ALL registered handlers for this concept
        // Handlers can choose to "Consume" (StopPropagation) or "Observe" (Continue)
        self.handlers.dispatch(intent);
    }
}
```

---

## Perception Layer

The Perception Layer bridges the gap between raw sensor data and semantic intent using **Sensor Fusion**.

### Sensor Fusion (N:1)

Instead of relying on a single sensor, the kernel aggregates data from all active sensors into a unified "World Model".

```rust
pub struct PerceptionManager {
    sensors: Vec<Box<dyn ObjectDetector>>,
}

impl PerceptionManager {
    pub fn detect_objects(&self) -> Vec<DetectedObject> {
        // Fuse data from Camera, Lidar, Radar, etc.
        let mut world_model = Vec::new();
        for sensor in &self.sensors {
            let data = sensor.detect();
            world_model.merge(data);
        }
        world_model
    }
}
```

### Supported Sensors
- **Hailo-8 NPU**: High-speed object detection (26 TOPS).
- **CPU Vision**:
  - `EdgeDetector`: Sobel operator for edge/shape detection.
  - `ColorBlobDetector`: Color-based object tracking.
- **Virtual Sensors**: For testing and simulation.

---

## Neural Memory System

The kernel implements a **Vector Database** directly in the memory allocator.

### Semantic Allocator
Memory blocks are tagged with both a `ConceptID` and a **Semantic Vector** (embedding).

```rust
pub struct SemanticBlock {
    pub concept_id: ConceptID,
    pub embedding: [f32; 64], // 64-d vector
    // ...
}
```

### Fuzzy Retrieval
Memory can be retrieved not just by address or ID, but by **meaning** using Cosine Similarity.

```rust
// Find memory semantically close to "Kitten" vector
let ptr = allocator.retrieve_nearest(&vec_kitten);
// Returns pointer to "CAT" block
```

---

## Hardware Drivers

### UART

Debug output via PL011 UART:

```rust
pub fn uart_write(s: &str);
pub fn uart_read() -> Option<u8>;
```

### Timer

ARM generic timer for scheduling:

```rust
pub fn timer_init();
pub fn timer_tick() -> u64;
pub async fn timer_sleep(ms: u64);
```

### GPIO

Pin control for LEDs and sensors:

```rust
pub fn gpio_set(pin: u32, value: bool);
pub fn gpio_get(pin: u32) -> bool;
```

### USB HID ✅
 
 Steno machine input via USB Host Controller (xHCI 1.2):
 
 ```rust
 pub struct XhciController {
     base_addr: usize,
     dcbaa: Option<NonNull<u8>>,      // Device Context Base Address Array
     cmd_ring: Option<NonNull<u8>>,   // Command Ring
     event_ring: Option<NonNull<u8>>, // Event Ring (Interrupter 0)
 }
 
 pub struct UsbHid {
     // HID Boot Protocol Parser
     pub fn parse_report(&self, report: &KeyboardReport) -> Option<Stroke>;
 }
 ```
 
 **Features**:
 - **Real xHCI Initialization**: Reset, Ring allocation, Interrupt setup.
 - **DMA Memory**: Uses `alloc_dma` for physically contiguous buffers.
 - **Boot Protocol**: Parses standard 8-byte Keyboard Reports.
 - **Key Mapping**: Maps QWERTY keys to Steno layout (Plover standard).

Supported devices:
- Georgi (GBoards)
- Uni (Plover HID Protocol)
- Any HID-compliant steno machine

### Framebuffer Console ✅

Text output on HDMI display:

```rust
pub struct Console {
    framebuffer: &'static mut Framebuffer,
    cursor_x: u32,
    cursor_y: u32,
}

impl Console {
    pub fn print(&mut self, s: &str);
    pub fn clear(&mut self);
}
```

Macros: `cprint!()`, `cprintln!()`

---

## English I/O Layer ✨ NEW!

The English I/O Layer provides natural language accessibility while maintaining the steno-native kernel core.

### Architecture

```rust
pub mod english {
    pub mod phrases;      // 200+ phrase → ConceptID mappings
    pub mod synonyms;     // 50+ synonym expansions
    pub mod parser;       // Multi-stage parsing pipeline
    pub mod responses;    // Natural language generation
    pub mod context;      // Conversation state management
}
```

### Input Pipeline

**Multi-Stage Parsing**:

1. **Normalization**: Lowercase, trim whitespace
2. **Exact Phrase Match**: Check 200+ phrase database
3. **Synonym Expansion**: Expand contractions and synonyms
4. **Keyword Extraction**: Natural language understanding
5. **Steno Fallback**: Try as raw steno notation

**Example**:

```rust
// Stage 2: Exact match
"help" → HELP intent (confidence: 1.0)

// Stage 3: Synonym expansion
"show sys info" → "show system information" → STATUS intent (0.95)

// Stage 4: Keyword extraction
"can you help me?" → extract["help"] → HELP intent (0.9)

// Stage 5: Steno fallback
"STAT" → parse as steno → STATUS intent (1.0)
```

### Output Generation

**Template-Based Responses**:

```rust
pub struct ResponseGenerator {
    pub verbose: bool,  // Adapts to user mode
}

impl ResponseGenerator {
    pub fn generate(&self, intent: &Intent, result: &IntentResult) -> String;
}
```

**Example Responses**:

```
Concise (Advanced): "CPU 45% | RAM 2.3GB | Up 3h"
Verbose (Beginner): "System Status: CPU 45%, Memory 2.3GB/8GB, Uptime 3h 42m"
```

### Conversation Context

**Stateful Understanding**:

```rust
pub struct ConversationContext {
    last_intent: Option<ConceptID>,
    last_result: Option<IntentResult>,
    mode: UserMode,  // Beginner/Intermediate/Advanced
    history: Vec<HistoryEntry>,
}
```

**Features**:
- Follow-up questions: "show it again", "more details"
- Pronoun resolution: "hide it", "show that"
- Auto-upgrade user mode based on usage
- Conversation history (last 10 commands)

### Performance

**Overhead Analysis**:
- Phrase lookup: ~5-10μs (linear search of 200 entries)
- Synonym expansion: ~5μs
- Template generation: ~10-20μs
- **Total**: ~30μs per command

**At 200 WPM** (3.3 commands/sec): 0.0001% CPU

**Steno Bypass**: Power users can bypass English layer entirely (0.1μs direct)

### Integration Example

```rust
use intent_kernel::english;

// Parse natural English
let intent = english::parse("show me system status");

// Execute (kernel core - unchanged)
let result = intent::execute_with_result(&intent.unwrap());

// Generate natural response
let response = english::generate_response(&intent.unwrap(), &result);
println!("{}", response);
// Output: "System: CPU 45%, RAM 2.3GB, Uptime 3h 42m..."
```

### See Also

For complete documentation, see [ENGLISH_LAYER.md](ENGLISH_LAYER.md).

---

## Boot Sequence

1. **Reset**: ARM starts at `_start` in `boot.s`
2. **EL2→EL1**: Drop from hypervisor to kernel mode
3. **BSS Clear**: Zero uninitialized memory
4. **Stack Setup**: Initialize kernel stack
5. **Rust Entry**: Jump to `kernel_main()`
6. **Init Drivers**: UART, Timer, GPIO
7. **Init Steno**: Load dictionary, start engine
8. **Main Loop**: Process strokes forever

---

## Non-Goals

These are explicitly NOT part of the architecture:

- ❌ Deep NLP or LLM-based parsing (English layer uses phrase matching + keyword extraction)
- ❌ Traditional shell/terminal
- ❌ POSIX compatibility
- ❌ Backward compatibility with word-based systems

**Note**: English text input is supported as a convenience layer, but internally
all commands are converted to steno strokes. The kernel never parses English—it
only looks up the stroke corresponding to an English word via reverse dictionary.
