docs/ENGLISH_LAYER.md, before:

# English I/O Layer - Production Implementation

## Overview

The English I/O Layer is a production-grade natural language interface to the steno-native Intent Kernel. It allows **billions of users** to interact with the system using natural English, while the kernel remains internally stenographic.

**Key Insight**: Steno stays internal. English is the user-facing translation layer.

## Architecture

```
┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                   USER EXPERIENCE LAYER                     │
│                  (Natural English I/O)                      │
│                                                             │
│  Input:  "show me system status"                           │
│  Output: "System: CPU 45%, RAM 2.3GB, Up 3h"               │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                            ↕
┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│               TRANSLATION LAYER (Bidirectional)             │
│                                                             │
│  English → Parser → Stroke → Intent  (INPUT)               │
│  Intent → Templates → English         (OUTPUT)             │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                            ↕
┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                 STENO-NATIVE KERNEL                         │
│              (Unchanged - Pure Intent)                      │
│                                                             │
│  Stroke (23-bit) → Dictionary → Intent → Execute           │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Module Structure

### Core Modules

```
kernel/src/english/
├── mod.rs          - Public API and initialization
├── phrases.rs      - 200+ phrase → ConceptID mappings
├── synonyms.rs     - 50+ synonym expansions
├── parser.rs       - Multi-stage English → Intent pipeline
├── responses.rs    - Intent → Natural language responses
└── context.rs      - Conversation state management
```

### Statistics

- **Files**: 6 modules
- **Code**: ~2,000 lines of production Rust
- **Phrases**: 200+ variations covering all major intents
- **Synonyms**: 50+ common word expansions
- **Tests**: Comprehensive unit tests in each module
- **Performance**: <30μs overhead per command (negligible)

## Features

### 1. Multi-Stage Parser (phrases.rs + parser.rs)

**Pipeline**:
1. Normalization (lowercase, trim)
2. Exact phrase match (200+ phrases)
3. Synonym expansion (50+ mappings)
4. Keyword extraction (natural language understanding)
5. Steno fallback (for power users)

**Examples**:
```rust
// Stage 2: Exact match
"help" → HELP intent (confidence: 1.0)

// Stage 3: Synonym expansion
"show sys info" → "show system status" → STATUS intent (confidence: 0.95)

// Stage 4: Keyword extraction
"can you help me?" → extract "help" → HELP intent (confidence: 0.9)

// Stage 5: Steno fallback
"STAT" → parse as steno → STATUS intent (confidence: 1.0)
```

### 2. Natural Language Responses (responses.rs)

**Before** (steno-only):
```
> STAT
[INTENT] STATUS
  Strokes processed: 42
  Intents matched:   40
```

**After** (English layer):
```
> show me system status
System: CPU 45% | RAM 2.3GB/8GB | Up 3h 42m
Steno: 42 strokes | 40 intents | 218 WPM

> more details
System Status
═══════════════════════════════════════
Performance:
• CPU Usage: 45%
• Memory: 2.3GB / 8GB (29% used)
• Uptime: 3 hours, 42 minutes

Stenographic Engine:
• Strokes Processed: 42
• Intents Recognized: 40
• Corrections Made: 2
• Average WPM: 218
• Accuracy: 95.2%

Status: All systems operational ✓
```

### 3. Conversation Context (context.rs)

**Stateful Understanding**:

```
> status
System: CPU 45%, RAM 2.3GB

> show it again
System: CPU 46%, RAM 2.4GB  [Repeated from context]

> more details
[Shows detailed version of STATUS]

> what about memory?
Memory: 2.4GB / 8GB used (30%)
```

**User Mode Adaptation**:
- **Beginner**: Verbose responses, explanations
- **Intermediate**: Normal responses
- **Advanced**: Concise output, can use steno directly

Auto-upgrades based on usage (20 commands → Intermediate, 100 → Advanced)

### 4. Synonym Expansion (synonyms.rs)

**50+ Mappings**:

```rust
// Contractions
"what's" → "what is"
"how's" → "how is"

// Command equivalents
"quit" → "exit"
"shutdown" → "reboot"
"info" → "status"

// Informal
"yeah" → "yes"
"nope" → "no"

// Abbreviations
"sys" → "system"
"mem" → "memory"
```

### 5. Comprehensive Phrase Database (phrases.rs)

**200+ Phrases** covering:

- **HELP**: 20 variations
  - "help", "?", "what can you do", "commands", etc.

- **STATUS**: 25 variations
  - "status", "how are you", "system info", "diagnostics", etc.

- **REBOOT**: 15 variations
  - "reboot", "restart", "reset", "power cycle", etc.

- **CLEAR**: 12 variations
  - "clear", "cls", "clean screen", etc.

- **Navigation, Confirmation, Actions**: 100+ more

## API Reference

### Parsing

```rust
use intent_kernel::english;

// Parse English text to intent
let intent = english::parse("show me system status");
if let Some(intent) = intent {
    println!("Concept: {:?}", intent.concept_id);
    println!("Confidence: {}", intent.confidence);
}
```

### Context-Aware Parsing

```rust
use intent_kernel::english::ConversationContext;

let mut context = ConversationContext::new();

// First command
let intent = context.parse("status");
context.update(concepts::STATUS, result);

// Follow-up (uses context)
let intent = context.parse("show it again");
// Returns STATUS intent from context
```

### Response Generation

```rust
use intent_kernel::english::{generate_response, IntentResult, SystemStats};

let intent = parse("status").unwrap();

let stats = SystemStats {
    cpu_usage: 45,
    memory_used: 2_500_000_000,
    memory_total: 8_000_000_000,
    uptime_seconds: 13_320,  // 3h 42m
    steno: /* ... */,
};

let result = IntentResult::with_data(ResultData::Stats(stats));
let response = generate_response(&intent, &result);

println!("{}", response);
// Output: "System: CPU 45% | RAM 2.3GB/8GB | Up 3h 42m..."
```

## Performance

### Overhead Analysis

**English Mode**:
- Phrase lookup: ~5-10μs (linear search of 200 entries)
- Synonym expansion: ~5μs (linear search of 50 entries)
- Template generation: ~10-20μs
- **Total**: ~30μs per command

**Steno Mode** (bypass):
- Direct stroke processing: ~0.1μs
- No English layer overhead

**At 200 WPM** (3.3 commands/sec):
- English overhead: 3.3 × 30μs = **0.0001% CPU**
- Completely negligible!

### Memory Footprint

- Phrase database: ~8KB (200 static strings)
- Synonym database: ~2KB (50 mappings)
- Parser/Generator: ~1KB (stateless)
- Context: ~512 bytes per session
- **Total**: ~12KB static + 512B per user

## Integration Example

### Main Loop (kernel/src/main.rs)

```rust
async fn steno_loop() {
    use intent_kernel::english;

    let mut context = english::ConversationContext::new();
    let mut input_buffer = [0u8; 64];

    loop {
        kprint!("intent> ");
        let len = drivers::uart::read_line_async(&mut input_buffer).await;
        let input = core::str::from_utf8(&input_buffer[..len])
            .unwrap_or("").trim();

        // Parse with context (English or Steno)
        if let Some(intent) = context.parse(input) {
            // Execute intent
            let result = intent::execute_with_result(&intent);

            // Generate natural response
            let response = english::generate_response(&intent, &result);
            cprintln!("{}", response);

            // Update context
            context.update(intent.concept_id, result);
        } else {
            cprintln!("I didn't understand '{}'. Type 'help' for assistance.", input);
        }
    }
}
```

## User Experience Comparison

### Beginner User (English-Only)

```
intent> help
Welcome to Intent Kernel!

You can type naturally to control the system:

System Commands:
• 'status' or 'how are you?' - Show system information
• 'help' or 'what can you do?' - Display this message
• 'clear' - Clear the screen
• 'reboot' - Restart the system
...

intent> show me system status
System: CPU 45% | RAM 2.3GB/8GB | Up 3h 42m
Steno: 42 strokes | 40 intents | 218 WPM

intent> thanks!
You're welcome! Type 'help' anytime.
```

### Advanced User (Hybrid)

```
intent> STAT
CPU 45% | RAM 29% | Up 3h

intent> can you show details?
System Status
═══════════════════════════════════════
[... detailed output ...]

intent> KHRAOER
[Screen clears]
```

### Steno Power User (Direct)

```
intent> STAT
45% | 29% | 3h

intent> *
[Undo]

intent> RAOE/PWOOT
Rebooting...
```

## Testing

### Unit Tests

Each module includes comprehensive tests:

```bash
# phrases.rs tests
✓ test_lookup_exact
✓ test_lookup_case_insensitive
✓ test_lookup_variations
✓ test_phrase_count

# synonyms.rs tests
✓ test_expand_phrase
✓ test_expand_contractions

# parser.rs tests
✓ test_parse_exact_phrase
✓ test_parse_natural_phrase
✓ test_parse_questions
✓ test_parse_keyword_extraction

# responses.rs tests
✓ test_help_response
✓ test_status_response
✓ test_format_duration

# context.rs tests
✓ test_context_repeat
✓ test_context_mode_upgrade
```

### Integration Testing

```rust
#[test]
fn test_end_to_end() {
    let intent = english::parse("show me system status");
    assert!(intent.is_some());

    let stats = create_test_stats();
    let result = IntentResult::with_data(ResultData::Stats(stats));
    let response = english::generate_response(&intent.unwrap(), &result);

    assert!(response.contains("CPU"));
    assert!(response.contains("RAM"));
}
```

## Future Enhancements

### Phase 1 (Complete ✓)
- ✓ Basic phrase matching (200+ phrases)
- ✓ Synonym expansion (50+ mappings)
- ✓ Multi-stage parser
- ✓ Response templates
- ✓ Conversation context

### Phase 2 (Planned)
- [ ] Perfect hash for O(1) phrase lookup
- [ ] Trie-based prefix matching
- [ ] LLM integration for fuzzy matching
- [ ] Voice input support
- [ ] Multi-language support

### Phase 3 (Future)
- [ ] Adaptive dictionary learning
- [ ] Personalized synonyms
- [ ] Context-aware completions
- [ ] Natural language command composition

## Design Principles

1. **Steno-Native Core**: Kernel stays pure. English is a translation layer.
2. **Zero Performance Impact**: <30μs overhead is negligible.
3. **Graceful Degradation**: Falls back to steno if English fails.
4. **Progressive Disclosure**: Beginner → Intermediate → Advanced modes.
5. **Extensibility**: Easy to add new phrases/synonyms/responses.

## Conclusion

The English I/O Layer transforms Intent Kernel from a **specialist tool** (steno-only) to a **universal platform** (billions of users).

**Key Achievement**: Maintained steno-native architecture while adding natural language accessibility.

This is production-ready code with:
- ✓ Comprehensive phrase coverage (200+)
- ✓ Robust parsing (multi-stage pipeline)
- ✓ Natural responses (template engine)
- ✓ Stateful context (conversation tracking)
- ✓ Performance optimized (<30μs overhead)
- ✓ Fully tested (unit + integration)
- ✓ Well documented

**The world can now use Intent Kernel in English, while the kernel thinks in strokes.**

Commit message:

Rebrand to Intent Kernel - Perceptual Computing Platform
- Replace 'Stenographic OS' branding with 'Perceptual Computing Platform'
- Position steno as 'fastest input path' not OS identity
- Update all documentation (README, ARCHITECTURE, ROADMAP, TODO, etc.)
- Replace 'steno-native' with 'semantic-first' terminology
- Add comprehensive COMPARATIVE_REVIEW.md with proper use cases
- Update source code comments to reflect new positioning
- Use cases: Accessibility, Edge AI, Kiosks, Research, High-Speed Input

Files modified:
- README.md: New header, Input Methods section
- docs/ARCHITECTURE.md: Updated overview and diagrams
- docs/COMPARATIVE_REVIEW.md: Complete rewrite with proper positioning
- docs/ENGLISH_LAYER.md, ENGLISH_LAYER_SUMMARY.md: Semantic-first messaging
- docs/ROADMAP.md, TODO.md: Updated phase names
- kernel/src/steno/mod.rs: 'Steno Input Engine (Fastest Path)'
- kernel/src/intent/mod.rs: Semantic-first documentation
- kernel/src/main.rs: Updated banner and init messages
- CHANGELOG.md, docs/API.md: Updated references

docs/ENGLISH_LAYER.md, after:

# English I/O Layer - Production Implementation

## Overview

The English I/O Layer is a production-grade natural language interface to Intent Kernel. It allows **everyone** to interact with the system using natural English commands, while internally the kernel processes inputs as semantic concepts.

**Key Insight**: Steno is the fastest input path, but English provides universal accessibility.

## Architecture

```
┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                   USER EXPERIENCE LAYER                     │
│                  (Natural English I/O)                      │
│                                                             │
│  Input:  "show me system status"                           │
│  Output: "System: CPU 45%, RAM 2.3GB, Up 3h"               │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                            ↕
┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│               TRANSLATION LAYER (Bidirectional)             │
│                                                             │
│  English → Parser → Stroke → Intent  (INPUT)               │
│  Intent → Templates → English         (OUTPUT)             │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                            ↕
┌────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│                 SEMANTIC INTENT CORE                        │
│              (Unchanged - Pure Intent)                      │
│                                                             │
│  ConceptID → Intent → Execute                               │
└────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
```

## Module Structure

### Core Modules

```
kernel/src/english/
├── mod.rs          - Public API and initialization
├── phrases.rs      - 200+ phrase → ConceptID mappings
├── synonyms.rs     - 50+ synonym expansions
├── parser.rs       - Multi-stage English → Intent pipeline
├── responses.rs    - Intent → Natural language responses
└── context.rs      - Conversation state management
```

### Statistics

- **Files**: 6 modules
- **Code**: ~2,000 lines of production Rust
- **Phrases**: 200+ variations covering all major intents
- **Synonyms**: 50+ common word expansions
- **Tests**: Comprehensive unit tests in each module
- **Performance**: <30μs overhead per command (negligible)

## Features

### 1. Multi-Stage Parser (phrases.rs + parser.rs)

**Pipeline**:
1. Normalization (lowercase, trim)
2. Exact phrase match (200+ phrases)
3. Synonym expansion (50+ mappings)
4. Keyword extraction (natural language understanding)
5. Steno fallback (for power users)

**Examples**:
```rust
// Stage 2: Exact match
"help" → HELP intent (confidence: 1.0)

// Stage 3: Synonym expansion
"show sys info" → "show system status" → STATUS intent (confidence: 0.95)

// Stage 4: Keyword extraction
"can you help me?" → extract "help" → HELP intent (confidence: 0.9)

// Stage 5: Steno fallback
"STAT" → parse as steno → STATUS intent (confidence: 1.0)
```

### 2. Natural Language Responses (responses.rs)

**Before** (steno-only):
```
> STAT
[INTENT] STATUS
  Strokes processed: 42
  Intents matched:   40
```

**After** (English layer):
```
> show me system status
System: CPU 45% | RAM 2.3GB/8GB | Up 3h 42m
Steno: 42 strokes | 40 intents | 218 WPM

> more details
System Status
═══════════════════════════════════════
Performance:
• CPU Usage: 45%
• Memory: 2.3GB / 8GB (29% used)
• Uptime: 3 hours, 42 minutes

Stenographic Engine:
• Strokes Processed: 42
• Intents Recognized: 40
• Corrections Made: 2
• Average WPM: 218
• Accuracy: 95.2%

Status: All systems operational ✓
```

### 3. Conversation Context (context.rs)

**Stateful Understanding**:

```
> status
System: CPU 45%, RAM 2.3GB

> show it again
System: CPU 46%, RAM 2.4GB  [Repeated from context]

> more details
[Shows detailed version of STATUS]

> what about memory?
Memory: 2.4GB / 8GB used (30%)
```

**User Mode Adaptation**:
- **Beginner**: Verbose responses, explanations
- **Intermediate**: Normal responses
- **Advanced**: Concise output, can use steno directly

Auto-upgrades based on usage (20 commands → Intermediate, 100 → Advanced)

### 4. Synonym Expansion (synonyms.rs)

**50+ Mappings**:

```rust
// Contractions
"what's" → "what is"
"how's" → "how is"

// Command equivalents
"quit" → "exit"
"shutdown" → "reboot"
"info" → "status"

// Informal
"yeah" → "yes"
"nope" → "no"

// Abbreviations
"sys" → "system"
"mem" → "memory"
```

### 5. Comprehensive Phrase Database (phrases.rs)

**200+ Phrases** covering:

- **HELP**: 20 variations
  - "help", "?", "what can you do", "commands", etc.

- **STATUS**: 25 variations
  - "status", "how are you", "system info", "diagnostics", etc.

- **REBOOT**: 15 variations
  - "reboot", "restart", "reset", "power cycle", etc.

- **CLEAR**: 12 variations
  - "clear", "cls", "clean screen", etc.

- **Navigation, Confirmation, Actions**: 100+ more

## API Reference

### Parsing

```rust
use intent_kernel::english;

// Parse English text to intent
let intent = english::parse("show me system status");
if let Some(intent) = intent {
    println!("Concept: {:?}", intent.concept_id);
    println!("Confidence: {}", intent.confidence);
}
```

### Context-Aware Parsing

```rust
use intent_kernel::english::ConversationContext;

let mut context = ConversationContext::new();

// First command
let intent = context.parse("status");
context.update(concepts::STATUS, result);

// Follow-up (uses context)
let intent = context.parse("show it again");
// Returns STATUS intent from context
```

### Response Generation

```rust
use intent_kernel::english::{generate_response, IntentResult, SystemStats};

let intent = parse("status").unwrap();

let stats = SystemStats {
    cpu_usage: 45,
    memory_used: 2_500_000_000,
    memory_total: 8_000_000_000,
    uptime_seconds: 13_320,  // 3h 42m
    steno: /* ... */,
};

let result = IntentResult::with_data(ResultData::Stats(stats));
let response = generate_response(&intent, &result);

println!("{}", response);
// Output: "System: CPU 45% | RAM 2.3GB/8GB | Up 3h 42m..."
```

## Performance

### Overhead Analysis

**English Mode**:
- Phrase lookup: ~5-10μs (linear search of 200 entries)
- Synonym expansion: ~5μs (linear search of 50 entries)
- Template generation: ~10-20μs
- **Total**: ~30μs per command

**Steno Mode** (bypass):
- Direct stroke processing: ~0.1μs
- No English layer overhead

**At 200 WPM** (3.3 commands/sec):
- English overhead: 3.3 × 30μs = **0.0001% CPU**
- Completely negligible!

### Memory Footprint

- Phrase database: ~8KB (200 static strings)
- Synonym database: ~2KB (50 mappings)
- Parser/Generator: ~1KB (stateless)
- Context: ~512 bytes per session
- **Total**: ~12KB static + 512B per user

## Integration Example

### Main Loop (kernel/src/main.rs)

```rust
async fn steno_loop() {
    use intent_kernel::english;

    let mut context = english::ConversationContext::new();
    let mut input_buffer = [0u8; 64];

    loop {
        kprint!("intent> ");
        let len = drivers::uart::read_line_async(&mut input_buffer).await;
        let input = core::str::from_utf8(&input_buffer[..len])
            .unwrap_or("").trim();

        // Parse with context (English or Steno)
        if let Some(intent) = context.parse(input) {
            // Execute intent
            let result = intent::execute_with_result(&intent);

            // Generate natural response
            let response = english::generate_response(&intent, &result);
            cprintln!("{}", response);

            // Update context
            context.update(intent.concept_id, result);
        } else {
            cprintln!("I didn't understand '{}'. Type 'help' for assistance.", input);
        }
    }
}
```

## User Experience Comparison

### Beginner User (English-Only)

```
intent> help
Welcome to Intent Kernel!

You can type naturally to control the system:

System Commands:
• 'status' or 'how are you?' - Show system information
• 'help' or 'what can you do?' - Display this message
• 'clear' - Clear the screen
• 'reboot' - Restart the system
...

intent> show me system status
System: CPU 45% | RAM 2.3GB/8GB | Up 3h 42m
Steno: 42 strokes | 40 intents | 218 WPM

intent> thanks!
You're welcome! Type 'help' anytime.
```

### Advanced User (Hybrid)

```
intent> STAT
CPU 45% | RAM 29% | Up 3h

intent> can you show details?
System Status
═══════════════════════════════════════
[... detailed output ...]

intent> KHRAOER
[Screen clears]
```

### Steno Power User (Direct)

```
intent> STAT
45% | 29% | 3h

intent> *
[Undo]

intent> RAOE/PWOOT
Rebooting...
```

## Testing

### Unit Tests

Each module includes comprehensive tests:

```bash
# phrases.rs tests
✓ test_lookup_exact
✓ test_lookup_case_insensitive
✓ test_lookup_variations
✓ test_phrase_count

# synonyms.rs tests
✓ test_expand_phrase
✓ test_expand_contractions

# parser.rs tests
✓ test_parse_exact_phrase
✓ test_parse_natural_phrase
✓ test_parse_questions
✓ test_parse_keyword_extraction

# responses.rs tests
✓ test_help_response
✓ test_status_response
✓ test_format_duration

# context.rs tests
✓ test_context_repeat
✓ test_context_mode_upgrade
```

### Integration Testing

```rust
#[test]
fn test_end_to_end() {
    let intent = english::parse("show me system status");
    assert!(intent.is_some());

    let stats = create_test_stats();
    let result = IntentResult::with_data(ResultData::Stats(stats));
    let response = english::generate_response(&intent.unwrap(), &result);

    assert!(response.contains("CPU"));
    assert!(response.contains("RAM"));
}
```

## Future Enhancements

### Phase 1 (Complete ✓)
- ✓ Basic phrase matching (200+ phrases)
- ✓ Synonym expansion (50+ mappings)
- ✓ Multi-stage parser
- ✓ Response templates
- ✓ Conversation context

### Phase 2 (Planned)
- [ ] Perfect hash for O(1) phrase lookup
- [ ] Trie-based prefix matching
- [ ] LLM integration for fuzzy matching
- [ ] Voice input support
- [ ] Multi-language support

### Phase 3 (Future)
- [ ] Adaptive dictionary learning
- [ ] Personalized synonyms
- [ ] Context-aware completions
- [ ] Natural language command composition

## Design Principles

1. **Semantic-First Core**: Kernel processes concepts directly. English is a translation layer.
2. **Zero Performance Impact**: <30μs overhead is negligible.
3. **Graceful Degradation**: Falls back to steno if English fails.
4. **Progressive Disclosure**: Beginner → Intermediate → Advanced modes.
5. **Extensibility**: Easy to add new phrases/synonyms/responses.

## Conclusion

The English I/O Layer makes Intent Kernel **accessible to everyone**, not just stenographers.

**Key Achievement**: Maintained semantic-first architecture while adding natural language accessibility.

This is production-ready code with:
- ✓ Comprehensive phrase coverage (200+)
- ✓ Robust parsing (multi-stage pipeline)
- ✓ Natural responses (template engine)
- ✓ Stateful context (conversation tracking)
- ✓ Performance optimized (<30μs overhead)
- ✓ Fully tested (unit + integration)
- ✓ Well documented

**Anyone can now use Intent Kernel in English, while power users can unlock maximum speed with steno.**
